Elizabeth Taylor, who amassed one of the world’s great jewelry collections, had her share of mishaps with gems. She suffered two major thefts, and then there was the time in 1977 when, while receiving the Hasty Pudding Award at Harvard, she leaned out a window, caught her string of pearls on the windowsill and sent a bunch flying.

So she might not have been surprised to see the battle that continues to rage over one of the big-ticket items from the 2011 auction by Christies of her jewelry collection and other possessions.

The auction house sold 1,778 lots of jewelry, film memorabilia and other assets, yielding $156 million over two weeks.

But things did not go so smoothly in regard to the so-called Taj Mahal diamond, part of a pendant that she received as a gift from Richard Burton. At auction, it sold for almost $9 million but since then has been mired in a legal dispute, revived this week when a lawsuit filed by people running a trust that put the jewelry up for sale accused Christie’s of mischaracterizing the provenance of the gem then canceling its sale to appease an important but unnamed client.

That client, according to court papers filed in State Supreme Court in Manhattan, decided that he no longer wanted the gem after he became convinced that it had never belonged to Shah Jahan, a 17th-century Mughal emperor who built the white marble mausoleum after which the diamond was named.

Christie’s wants the money back from the Sothern Trust, which entered into a consignment agreement with the auction house for the sale of Ms. Taylor’s jewelry collection after her death in 2011. But the trust has refused, saying there was no legitimate reason to cancel the Taj Mahal sale. Three trustees are suing the auction house, contending that Christie’s is withholding the money from the sale of other items during the auction, including a Bulgari emerald and diamond ring worth nearly $3 million, until the trust returns the Taj Mahal proceeds.

“Christie’s has intentionally and inappropriately held hostage the money owed to the Trust for the Bulgari ring in an effort to increase its leverage in the dispute over the diamond,” a lawyer for the trust wrote in the suit.

The trustees had filed a virtually identical lawsuit in federal court in California in 2015 but that suit was dismissed later that year with an agreement that the parties would try to resolve their differences through mediation and would “work together in good faith to sell the Taj Mahal Diamond.”

Christie’s on Friday released a statement expressing surprise at the latest suit.

“The Trust apparently decided to cease discussions and instead pursued legal action without notice,” it said. “Christie’s believes it is unfortunate that this issue cannot be resolved through mediation, especially given the success of the sale held for the Trust’s benefit.”

In their lawsuit, the trustees say that if the buyer was under any misimpression about the work it had been created by Christie’s. The suit says that the auction catalog had been carefully and correctly worded to say the pendant contained a diamond from India.

But Christie’s went beyond that description in its sales pitches, court papers added, and identified the diamond as having belonged to Shah Jahan. For instance, the papers said, Christie’s representatives promoted the auction on television by saying that it included a diamond that had been owned by Shah Jahan during the Mughal period. A Christie’s auctioneer later made similar assertions during the auction, the papers said.

The Christie’s catalog described the item in lavish terms, calling it a diamond and jade pendant necklace with a ruby and gold chain and listing an estimated price of $300,000 to $500,000. It is unclear to what degree the price obtained at auction was tied to the belief that the diamond had a royal pedigree.

“The allegation is that Christie’s mischaracterized a specific aspect of its provenance,” David Fink, a lawyer for the Sothern trustees said of the diamond on Friday. “But that doesn’t make it a less enchanting item.”
