LOS ANGELES — Cheryl Boone Isaacs, the departing president of the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences, said on Friday that she would also leave the organization’s board, where she has served a cumulative 24 years.

Aside from Ms. Boone Isaacs’s decision not to seek re-election to the board — she has told friends that the academy’s serial controversies have exhausted her — the most notable aspect of this year’s academy elections involves Netflix, which has aggressively but so far unsuccessfully tried to win Oscars for its films, which are largely distributed online.

Ted Sarandos, Netflix’s chief content officer, is one of 13 studio executives vying for an open board seat earmarked for a company representative. The incumbent is Dan Fellman, who is viewed as Hollywood’s foremost theatrical distribution expert. A victory by Mr. Sarandos would send a message about his streaming service’s rising place in the film industry’s hierarchy.

Ms. Boone Isaacs, 67, characterized her board retirement as self-sacrificing. “It will be a privilege to provide the opportunity for new voices to have a seat at the table,” she said in a statement, calling her long board service “my greatest honor.”

But her decision, disclosed earlier by The Hollywood Reporter, was also viewed by some people in the industry as a victory for the academy’s chief executive, Dawn Hudson. Ms. Boone Isaacs and Ms. Hudson have sometimes been at odds as they have contended with one academy crisis after another, including #OscarSoWhite and the epic envelope bungling that marred the last Oscars ceremony. In April, the academy renewed Ms. Hudson’s contract through June 2020.

Academy bylaws prevented Ms. Boone Isaacs from seeking another term as president, an unpaid position that made her the organization’s public face as it came under withering attack in recent years for a membership that is overwhelmingly white and male. Ms. Boone Isaacs, who has worked with Ms. Hudson to carry out several diversity initiatives, was elected to four consecutive one-year terms as president, the most possible without stepping aside for at least one year.

The academy’s 54-member board will select a new president from its ranks in August. Contenders include the casting director David Rubin and the actress Laura Dern, a two-time Oscar nominee.

But first come the board elections, and Ms. Boone Isaacs was eligible to run again in those.

Starting next week, each of the academy’s 17 branches — actors, producers, studio executives, cinematographers — will begin a process, stretching into June, of winnowing candidates for open seats in rounds of voting. Candidates like Mr. Sarandos throw their own hats into the ring.

Fifteen members of the academy’s publicists branch, for instance, are vying for its open board seat — the one Ms. Boone Isaacs has held for two consecutive three-year terms. Academy rules require board members to run for re-election every three years; they are permitted to serve three consecutive terms before having to take at least one year off.

Results of the board races will be announced in July.
