ANIMAL MOMS 8 p.m. on Nat Geo Wild. Do you kvell over otter mommies and babies, or purr along with cats and their kittens? Then stop right here. Three hours of heartwarming programming follows animals and their offspring from the moment the little ones are born through their tantrum-filled toddler years and, finally, the home schooling that keeps them safe and sound.

MOMMIE DEAREST (1981) all day on IFC. “No wire hangers!”: Faye Dunaway channels Joan Crawford and her nurturing skills in this camp classic, shown from morning till night, starting at 6 a.m.

REQUIEM FOR A DREAM (2000) 12:10 a.m. on TMC. Jared Leto, Ellen Burstyn, Jennifer Connelly and Marlon Wayans are an ensemble tour de force as four addicts — a Brooklyn pretty boy, his mother, his girlfriend and his pal — self-destructing as they search for a reality-blurring high. Darren Aronofsky’s hyperkinetic drama is a downer and a knockout.

BLACK WIDOW on Walter Presents. This Dutch crime series has been compared to “The Sopranos” — “if Tony got whacked in Episode 1, and Carmela took over,” as an article in The New York Times put it. Monic Hendrickx stars as Carmen van Walraven, a mother of three who assumes control of her assassinated husband’s crime ring. To protect the children, naturally.

BAD MOMS (2016) on Amazon and iTunes. Jon Lucas and Scott Moore (“The Hangover”) take on the smother mothers of America: the ones who can head the P.T.A., whip up vegan cookies for the bake sale and tote their kids to and from enough activities to pad a college application — all while looking perfect. Christina Applegate, Jada Pinkett Smith and Annie Mumolo play the superior species. Mila Kunis is Amy, the working mom who exhausts herself trying to keep up — until she decides to join a couple of wild mamas (Kristen Bell and Kathryn Hahn) who no longer care. Those are shot glasses you hear clinking.

BRIGHT LIGHTS: STARRING CARRIE FISHER AND DEBBIE REYNOLDS (2017) on HBO Go and iTunes. Ms. Fisher, forever Princess Leia in “Star Wars,” and her mother, Ms. Reynolds, the 1950s movie star turned cabaret singer, famously died within a day of each other in December. This documentary from Fisher Stevens and Alexis Bloom follows these women and their routines in what they call “the compound,” living in separate houses — but never very far apart.

THE KIDS ARE ALL RIGHT (2010) on iTunes and Starz. The children (Mia Wasikowska and Josh Hutcherson) conceived by a lesbian couple (Annette Bening and Julianne Moore) with the help of an anonymous sperm donor find their father (Mark Ruffalo). Lisa Cholodenko’s take on the American family and gay marriage is so canny and agile “that it deserves to stand on its own,” A. O. Scott wrote in The Times.
