Good morning. Happy Mother’s Day! Happy Mother’s Day even if, like my mother, you reject the holiday as crass commercialism, a fabrication of the greeting-card industry, a sop to the flower market and the brunch industrial complex. Moms work hard! And even if they ought to be recognized for that labor every day, it doesn’t mean you can’t take a few minutes on this particular one to make a call, write a card, assemble some photographs, bake a cake.

So even if you’re a gruff old salt, take a look at our collection of recipes for Mother’s Day, and see if you can’t gin something up today for the maternal people in your life. You could make a Dutch baby right now. Or a crustless quiche. At the bare minimum, you could roast a grapefruit and serve it with affection and gratitude.

Wait. Maybe you are a mom. Maybe you just got the grapefruit — half-cold, half-scorched — along with lukewarm coffee and a smudged card from the kids, delivered to you in bed. Nice. You get that and a half-hour of quiet with a screen, and then the kids will be back, bored out of their minds and ready for you, once more, to occupy them.

For you, The New York Times Magazine has a gift, a special section in the print issue of The Times today devoted entirely to children and their interests. Throw it in their direction if you can and, when they come to you later with the page devoted to the joys of making this top-notch new recipe from Margaux Laskey for a chocolate-chip pizza cookie, well, make it. It’s a ridiculously fun trompe l’oeil project for children and adults alike.

For dinner: baked Brie and one of those enormous Amy Schumer glasses of wine. Thank you for your service, ladies. The world is in your debt.

On Monday, you may make Pierre Franey’s recipe for fettuccine with asparagus for dinner. It’s ridiculously simple to cook and takes very little time. I love the whisper of nutmeg, even if I sometimes add more butter than Pierre advised. (It takes somewhat longer to cook, but if you’re feeding teenagers or trenchermen, try on my recipe for Portobello patty melts instead.)

For Tuesday night, how about chicken tagine with olives and preserved lemons? Or grilled chicken Parm? Or soup made of … whatever you want?

Take it relatively easy on Wednesday night, with Florence Fabricant’s simple recipe for salmon in parsley sauce and an accompanying bowl of rice pilaf.

Tacos on Thursday? Sure: I’ll be flogging the joys of hard-shell tacos with picadillo for days! Though if you just can’t stomach the crispiness, pick up a rotisserie chicken and make enchiladas with salsa verde. That and a few hours of “Shetland” on Netflix? Life is better than you thought it might be, a few days ago.

And to round out the week? How about a big platter of Friday night garlic shrimp with peas, with a Spanish tortilla and a pitcher of sangria?

After dinner you can set up the ingredients for our recipe for the blueberry muffins that used to be served at the Ritz-Carlton in Boston, and you will be ready for a bright Saturday morning. (Some are more partial to the blueberry muffins from Jordan Marsh. We have that recipe, too. Boston’s hilarious. Just bake what you think Kay Hanley would tell you to bake.)

Many thousands more recipes to cook this week are available for your examination and retrieval on Cooking. Save the ones you’re interested in making to your recipe box, so you can find them later. Put stars on the recipes you like best, and please add notes to them if you have a good point to add to the conversation. (Understand: We’re not looking for comments. We’re looking for community.) And if anything goes wrong, please reach out for help. As I look around, they don’t do it like my clique: cookingcare@nytimes.com.
