When all of the little plates of pickles and vegetables and whatnot land on the table at the start of a Korean meal, it’s like winning a game show. They are called banchan, and they shower down out of nowhere, like balloons. Fermented daikon and wavy cabbage leaves, pink with chile paste. Pinwheels of soy-stained lotus root. Silvery, crunchy stir-fried anchovies no bigger than paper matches.

If I’m in a restaurant, I pay close attention to these dishes. The better they are, the higher my hopes for the rest of the meal. They serve as a quick reminder from the outset of how varied Korean cuisine can be, how it can pack both nuance and power. And, of course, I like them because at most Korean restaurants they’re free.

It was my strong feelings about banchan that made me suspicious when I first heard that a new restaurant called Atoboy had made them the foundation of its menu. What could this be but another ploy to charge us for something that used to come with the cost of the meal? We’ve lost the battle over bread. I was ready to draw a line in the sand over banchan.

After three dinners at Atoboy (ah-TOE-boy) since last fall and one quick snack at the bar, I’m happy to admit that I was wrong. This is no scam. Junghyun Park, the chef, uses banchan as a starting point, then goes on to build smart, surprising dishes around it.

Look at what he does with those pinwheels of lotus root, laying them over a bed of tofu in soft, tiny curds like ricotta. It’s a great dish, half crunchy and half creamy, both halves humming along under a dressing of chile oil and sesame oil.

Fans of the barbecue at Kang Ho Dang Baekjeong will remember the pan of corn in melted cheese that sits at the edge of the domed grill and is basted by the hot drippings that slide down from the sizzling meat. Mr. Park has a wonderful take on this, using bacon for its fat and taleggio for its tang, mixing in the fermented soybean paste called doenjang to make everything more intense. When a bowl of it showed up, it got side-eyes at my table. Corn out of season? Nobody who tasted it stayed skeptical.

Mr. Park, 32, was raised in Seoul. Bypassing culinary school, he went on a grand tour and learned to cook at restaurants in England and Australia. At the end, he returned to his hometown to work in the kitchen at Jungsik, a westernized Korean restaurant with global aspirations. When Jungsik set up an outpost in Lower Manhattan, Mr. Park was dispatched to serve as its chef de cuisine.

Finally ready to go out on his own, he opened Atoboy on East 28th Street last summer with his wife, Ellia, a veteran of the dining rooms at Noreetuh and Maialino. She manages the restaurant.

Like Jungsik, Atoboy favors the subtler end of the Korean flavor spectrum, but it avoids fussing and tweezing. Mr. Park’s novel and lovely sea bass tartare, under a shimmering pale-green layer of chopped kiwi, mint and fermented spring garlic, could easily slide onto the menu at Jungsik if he decked out the plate with some foofaraw. (I’m glad he doesn’t.)

The low-key atmosphere that the Parks have set down, though, has little in common with the carpeted environs of Jungsik, which affects a formality so stiff around the spine that the servers might be wearing back braces. Atoboy is also a deliberate step away from the controlled chaos of the Korean restaurants a few blocks north on 32nd Street. Between its patched walls of raw concrete, simple wooden tables are arranged in two symmetrical rows with a narrow path to the kitchen down the middle.

It looks like a downtown wine bar, and in fact wine is one of the chief attractions. The list is brief but manages to take you to places you wouldn’t expect to visit in a Korean restaurant. There’s a concentration of bottles from Nikolaihof, Gut Oggau and other fine Austrian producers; a small flock of Loire winemakers such as Olga Raffault; Champagnes from Charles Ellner and other independent labels; and some respected West Coast names like Pedroncelli and Dirty & Rowdy. Everything I’ve tried has cohabited amicably with Mr. Park’s food.

Although all 18 dishes on the menu can be ordered on their own, servers suggest a $36 meal made of one from each of three categories — roughly, cold salads, warm appetizers and plates where seafood or meat do most of the work. They’re served more or less in that order but without pauses between the courses, and the plates pile up in the middle of the table.

This makes it too easy for nuanced dishes, like fried and braised sunchokes with oyster mushrooms and oranges dressed in a creamy truffle emulsion, to get lost. The servers insist that everything is meant for sharing. Heard that one before? But some dishes, like the delicate egg custard in a smoky dashi with morels and soybeans, were worse for wear and tear after they were doled out to individual plates.

It’s almost impossible to get worked up about any of this, though, because the $36 menu is such a fair deal, and because so many of the dishes work so well and do things you didn’t know Korean food could do.

Mr. Park’s take on yuk hwe is memorable, the beef tartare cut into long skinny threads that are tossed with soy sauce, dotted with nettle cream and topped with what seem to be julienne potato chips. Braised mackerel, usually cooked in soy sauce, is simmered in a complex green-chile broth. Little drums of octopus leg, a dot of parsley oil in the center of each one, are ringed around a kind of hash of kimchi and chorizo — two things that were meant to be together, though I never would have guessed.

After these shifting, swirling flavors, the desserts have a clarifying effect. The ginger panna cotta with pink grapefruit is just as refreshing as it sounds. There’s also one that uses sujeonggwa, the sweet cinnamon punch ladled out at the end of Korean meals. It’s frozen into a granita and then spooned over burrata, lychee yogurt and candied walnuts for a cheese course you won’t find anywhere but Atoboy.
