LOS ANGELES — It is a 25-minute drive from Hollywood to Salazar, a Sonoran barbecue restaurant on the site of an abandoned auto body repair shop in Frogtown, an eclectic neighborhood ringed by power lines and factories that is better known for its history of frog infestations than for its restaurant scene.

Yet the other night, Salazar was bustling. A young crowd gathered in a low-lit, gravel-filled courtyard, many sipping a house drink known as La Paloma — a boozy slush of mezcal and grapefruit juice, with a punch of ancho chile — as they waited for one of the tables scattered under the canopy of palm and African sumac trees, warmly illuminated against the night sky.

Salazar, which opened last June, does not have a telephone. Wine is poured into juice glasses, water into tin camping mugs. Firewood is stacked outside the kitchen, where food is prepared over an open flame: mesquite-grilled pork chops, hanger steak and branzino. There are carne asada tacos, and bowls of potatoes puréed with green chorizo, a reminder that Salazar is a project of one of this city’s more accomplished Mexican chefs, Esdras Ochoa.

Put aside the perennial (and tiresome) arguments about whether New York or Los Angeles has the better food scene. There are few cities displaying as much restaurant churn and change these days as this one. Los Angeles is once again showing the trait that has always been fundamental to its identity: relentless reinvention.

It’s an impulse spurred, in part, by this city’s bounty of space, produce and ethnicities, but also by people willing to drive 45 minutes in search of the latest restaurant.

Chefs are hunting for places with cheap — well, relatively cheap — rents in up-and-coming neighborhoods, away from communities like Santa Monica, Venice, Beverly Hills and West Hollywood, which offer established, thriving and satisfying restaurants.

That means a march toward the east, to places like Frogtown, Silver Lake and Highland Park. Or to downtown Los Angeles and Koreatown, where Here’s Looking at You recently opened in what had been a sandwich shop, serving such non-Korean dishes as sturgeon with aged rice porridge, chicken skin and buttermilk.

Immigration, long a defining dynamic of Los Angeles, is entering a new phase: Many second- and third-generation children of immigrants are chefs now, not only comfortable cooking what they ate growing up, but also creating mash-ups with cuisines they may have encountered in a neighborhood a short drive away. (Hence the pork belly with pinto beans from Mr. Ochoa at Salazar, or the clam-and-lardo tacos that Ray Garcia serves at B.S. Taqueria in downtown Los Angeles.)

“California food used to be wrapped in French or in Italian,” said Jessica Koslow, a daughter of Eastern European immigrants and the owner of Sqirl, a breakfast-and-lunch restaurant in East Hollywood that always seems to have a line out the door. “Now it’s, like, wrapped up in Vietnamese, Middle Eastern, Armenian, Thai, Mexican.”

And perhaps not surprisingly, a city that has never really seemed comfortable with white-tablecloth elegance is flying its casual and carefree flag. Michelin doesn’t award stars here, and thank goodness for that: Los Angeles will never be a Michelin kind of town. No one seemed flustered one night when a couple showed up in jeans and sweatshirts at Gwen, an inventive and, in any other city, fancy, restaurant with a $95 fixed-price menu on the edge of Hollywood, opened last June by the chef Curtis Stone.

The energy in Los Angeles restaurants is very much in keeping with what is taking place in other spheres across this city, from museums to music to architecture.

“There are so few rules in L.A. dining that it always has a potential of possibility: That is the tradition of L.A. dining,” said Patric Kuh, the longtime restaurant critic for Los Angeles Magazine. “Somehow in L.A. the unlikely becomes real and great. I think that is part of what attracts people. There isn’t a sense of, ‘What will somebody else think of what I am doing?’”

But out-of-towners are watching. The parade of just New Yorkers who have announced plans over the past year to open restaurants here is formidable: Daniel Humm of Eleven Madison Park, who has his eye on a spot downtown; Ken Friedman and April Bloomfield of the Spotted Pig, whose new restaurant is being built a few blocks from Gwen on Sunset Boulevard; and Enrique Olvera, the owner of Cosme, who is looking to open a restaurant here by the end of 2018.

Sara Kramer and Sarah Hymanson arrived three years ago after cooking at Glasserie in Brooklyn. They first opened a falafel restaurant in the rejuvenated food court that has emerged in the old Grand Central Market in downtown Los Angeles before unveiling Kismet, a restaurant that took over a pizzeria on a quiet stretch of Hollywood Boulevard in Los Feliz.

They have discovered here what other chefs have found after crossing the country: a sunny place where strawberries are in season 10 months a year, and where Ms. Kramer can grow vegetables and herbs for her restaurant in her backyard.

“It’s nice not to be forced to change the menu because you don’t have the availability of certain products,” she said. “On the other hand, there’s something nice about the seasonability of New York.”

“Tomatoes!” Ms. Hymanson said, another local product that can be found more often than not at the farmers’ market. “In New York in the winter, you just have root vegetables and dried things. You’d better get really creative.”

Their cooking is inspired by the daily bounty of farmers’ markets and by the Middle East: hen-of-the-woods mushrooms with chickpeas and pea shoots, steeped in almond broth spiced with green chile.

And Kismet celebrates the informal in all its east-side glory. The other night, glasses of farmhouse ale and bowls of spiced cashews with kaffir lime leaf were lined up on the bar as the crowd waited for seats at blond-wood tables neatly stacked with plates and napkins. At Kismet, you set your own table and pour your own coffee.

“We are trying to apply a higher-level restaurant ethos to a much more casual experience,” Ms. Kramer said as she picked through a basket of chervil that would go into a cucumber salad made with persimmon and rose-water labneh, a strained yogurt. “And I think the same thing goes with the technique and the cooking. We are constantly applying real, high-level technique to a casual experience.”

Ms. Hymanson picked up the thought. “We want it be fun,” she said. “We want it to be messy. We don’t want people to feel too buttoned up. Everything is intentional, even if it appears to be casual. Casual and approachable makes a lot of sense in this town.”

This is not to say it’s easy to open a restaurant in Los Angeles. Despite its freewheeling image, California has exacting regulations — on everything from the amount of time servers can work between breaks to the number of off-street parking spaces — that can be punishing in this low-profit-margin business. Los Angeles, like some other cities, moved in 2015 to raise the minimum wage to $15 an hour, from $9, by 2020.

New restaurants are appearing every week, but good ones are closing as well: Pok Pok LA, the much-anticipated Thai restaurant that Andy Ricker opened in 2015, succumbed in March to slow business.

The sheer number of new restaurants can discourage chefs trying to find a foothold with what can be a fickle clientele.

“It’s an inevitable cycle where restaurateurs try to go into places and find low rent, the crowds come, and the buildings get more expensive and you have to move on,” said Brad Johnson, the owner of Post & Beam in Baldwin Hills, who came here from New York to run restaurants 26 years ago. “I’ve watched the cycle happen a lot. But it’s sped up by social media, and people’s attention spans are so fast.”

“I can’t remember the last 10 places I’ve gone to here because there are 10 more places I want to go,” he added. “L.A. is very much a what’s-next town. People used to tell me, ‘You’re in the restaurant business, that’s really hard.’ I’d say, ‘It’s not that hard.’ But I feel it now.”

Still, the same forces that have long propelled restaurants here are as powerful as ever, and account for why this city has come so far from the well-documented days when food trucks and strip-mall restaurants defined the food scene.

In addition to the year-round produce, there are the wealthy patrons who have supported higher-end, and consistently excellent, restaurants like Spago in Beverly Hills. Yet they are often willing to drive out to the San Gabriel Valley to try such restaurants as Shanghai No. 1 Seafood, which the Los Angeles Times food critic Jonathan Gold called “the most ambitious Chinese restaurant to open in Los Angeles in a decade — maybe ever.”

“Each city has their hardship,” Ms. Koslow said. “I think the idea of ‘If you can make it here, you can make it anywhere’ is true in New York. The kitchens there are for the most part very tight. The walk-ins are down stairs. You’re constantly in tight spaces and making every little inch count.”

“Here we have space,” she added, sitting in a storefront she took over next to Sqirl that she uses for food preparation. “With the addition of this space, we are able to evolve a menu and explore what food is in a way that is harder to do on the East Coast. Our walk-in is quite large. Which means we are able to fit in more from the farmers’ market.”

The possibilities in an ever-evolving city like this are captured by places like Gwen. Its two stories in Hollywood once housed two unremarkable restaurants, next door to Psychiatry: An Industry of Death Museum, run by a group funded by the Church of Scientology. Mr. Stone, the chef at Gwen, is also the chef at Maude in Beverly Hills, an impossible-to-get-into restaurant where the monthly menus are built around a single ingredient, like endive or pears.

That Mr. Stone settled on the Hollywood location suggests how the restaurant scene’s center of gravity is shifting. Gwen has a butcher counter in the front of the house and a changing assortment of charcuterie and high-grade steaks, and its menu is endlessly varied, with dishes like cured salmon with shiso, grapefruit and wasabi.

In Koreatown, Here’s Looking at You strikes a surprising note in a neighborhood where the dining options were once mostly limited to Korean restaurants. There are shelves of books above the bar — you don’t often find that at restaurants here — a soothing backdrop one recent evening as patrons dipped blistered shishito peppers in tonnato sauce.

For all of the changes going on, this restaurant is respectful of its elders. The Weston, a concoction of a local gin and a violet liquor, arrived with a sidecar holding a chilled refill, a homage to the epic don’t-have-more-than-one martini at the Musso & Frank Grill, a grande dame in Hollywood that still packs people in. (That said, there was a photo of Morrissey on the Here’s Looking at You wall because, as our waiter explained, “Chef likes Morrissey.”)

In Larchmont, a quiet slice of a suburban neighborhood that is the home of Paramount Pictures, a lively restaurant named Kali opened last January on Melrose Avenue, with an exposed kitchen and a dining room that is a warm, inviting bustle.

The bold spirit of the place is reflected by the black barley risotto, cooked in a tea made from garlic that turns black after six weeks of fermentation, then topped with a disk of toasted Fiscalini, a Parmesan cheese produced in California. “It gives the dish an umami kick in the face,” said Kevin Meehan, the chef and owner. And it seems almost tame next to a drink called the New Pad Thai: green chile vodka, Aqua Perfecta and lime over coconut ice, resting under a tangle of bean sprouts, with a carrot poking out of the top.

Mr. Kuh, the critic, said places like Kali captured what has entranced him about restaurants since he first began reviewing them 16 years ago. (Before that, he was a restaurant cook.)

“When I look back at early Spago, the idea that you could have a guy who had worked at Maxim’s, using almond wood to grill, at a restaurant above the Tower Records store on Sunset Boulevard, and reimagine what the state of California would represent culinarily — that was Spago in 1982,” he said.

In the same way, the Los Angeles of 2017 is the kitchen at Salazar cooking tacos behind a plate-glass window over an open mesquite fire in Frogtown, as a procession of Ubers and Lyfts drops off customers in a neighborhood that was barely on the map back in those early days of Spago.
