The bodega is two aisles wide. Toward the back, where a piñata shaped like a giant frilly Negra Modelo beer bottle hangs by the ceiling vents, Pedro Rodriguez stands as studious as an apothecary, quietly filling plastic cups with shrimp, purplish nubs of octopus and a red liquid that looks lit from within. It is half cocktail, half remedy, a conjuring of Veracruz, Mexico, in Jackson Heights, Queens.

“I’ve been coming here since I was a kid,” said a young woman seated at the lone table, backed by boxes of Cup Noodles and Coors Light. She inherited her taste for cóctel de camarones from her mother, who craved it when pregnant.

Her family found Mr. Rodriguez five years ago, selling his tonics — versions of the cocktail are known in Latin America as vuelve a la vida (back to life) and rompe colchón (mattress breaker) — under the name La Esquina del Camarón Mexicano, outside a bodega near the Elmhurst Avenue subway stop. Later they followed him to this corner of Roosevelt Avenue, faithful customers as La Esquina expanded from a sidewalk stall to a small indoor kitchen. (The stall still appears on weekends.)

The menu has expanded, too, but the cocktails remain the draw, available in four sizes, including by the quart. Mr. Rodriguez learned to make them in Mexico City from a native of Veracruz. He starts with homemade tomato sauce, onions, lime, a touch of olive oil and clam juice, a concession to circumstances. “In Mexico,” he said, “we use oyster juice, but here I can’t get it.”

Beyond that? He laughed. “My secret.”

Shrimp and octopus, boiled with salt, crowd the depths. (The cocktail can come with either alone, but I like the contrast.) On top is a small riot of cilantro and crescents of avocado in immaculate pale yellow-green ombré. The first sip triggers the nostalgia centers for ketchup, and then the brine kicks in. It’s best when you work all the flavors and textures into one spoonful: bright, creamy, meaty, salty-sweet.

Packets of saltines accompany each cup. A friend and regular advised me to crumble them over the cocktail, but I observed others simply taking nibbles between spoonfuls. Mr. Rodriguez said, “It’s whatever you like.” In truth, I didn’t need them.

Mr. Rodriguez, who came to New York in 1989 and worked for years as a painter and carpenter, sending money home to his family in Mexico, now devotes his time to La Esquina. He has added empanadas to the menu, their shells as light as wonton skins, sealed around sea bass flaked in a pan with garlic and Mexican adobo seasoning. After they’re fried, he opens a bit of the seam and slips in mayonnaise, cilantro and a slice of avocado so fresh it tastes like sunrise.

A clean, mild ceviche of sea bass and lime, given a boost by pico de gallo, is strewn over a tostada. Tacos are generously stocked: a tumble of octopus and onions, some bits glossy and crunchy, some dark and sticky-sweet; fillets of sea bass simply grilled with paprika, or given a rugged breading and stripes of fired-up guacamole; whiting dusted in corn flour and fried until it achieves an effervescent crust that calls to mind puffy pork skins.

My favorite dish was flautas de cazón, tortillas rolled tight around a creamy minilla, or hash, of dogfish (a type of small shark, commonly used in England to make fish and chips), then deep-fried. It has a tickle of lemon and licorice from epazote and a tinge of the sea.

Customers station themselves at the table, the windowsill or a low shelf, each set with a saltshaker and an enormous bottle of Valentina hot sauce, which brings good cling, upfront heat and a citrus coda. But it’s worth asking for the house-made salsa roja, a crush of chiles de arbol, served not in a meager ramekin but in a bowl with a wooden spoon. It is thick and hot, with an honest smack of bitterness, and great.

On my visits, fellow diners chatted with me in Spanish, as if I, too, were a regular. When I finally confessed that I didn’t speak the language, one man asked in English: “Do you live around here? How do you get by?” He then kindly gave me directions to other hidden kitchens inside other bodegas up and down the strip, and, grateful, I wrote down every word.
