Mario Maglieri, who presided over a rock ’n’ roll mini-empire on the Sunset Strip in West Hollywood at the Whisky a Go Go and the Rainbow Bar & Grill, where he nurtured generations of musicians with encouragement, food and tough love, died on May 4 in Los Angeles. He was 93.

His death was confirmed by his son Mikeal.

The Whisky was opened in 1964 by a former policeman named Elmer Valentine, who soon asked Mr. Maglieri, a friend from Chicago, to help run the club. It became a critical part of the Los Angeles rock scene.

For a time, the Doors were the house band. Jimi Hendrix and Janis Joplin played there. So did Led Zeppelin, the Byrds, the Who, Otis Redding, the Turtles and Neil Young. Later on came Guns N’ Roses, Motley Crue and Metallica.

The Beatles demanded to visit the Whisky when they toured the United States in 1964. Jayne Mansfield and Steve McQueen were regulars. “Everybody was there,” the singer Johnny Rivers, who performed there, told Vanity Fair in 2000. “I mean, you’d look up, and there was Cary Grant dancing.”

And one day Mr. Maglieri’s secretary alerted him to an intimidating man who was decamped in a booth, writing. “What are you doing here?” Mr. Maglieri asked the man, who turned out to be Charles Manson, according to the Vanity Fair article. “We’re closed. You can’t be here.”

“He looked at me and says, ‘I can have you killed,’” Mr. Maglieri said, after which he grabbed Mr. Manson and threw him out of the club.

The silver-haired, cigar-smoking Mr. Maglieri was more accommodating to the musicians who played at the Whisky or ate at the nearby Rainbow Bar, with its signature Italian food. He understood that some needed a free meal and others a kind word.

“To play the Whisky a Go Go was the holy grail coming up,” Nikki Sixx, the bassist for Motley Crue, told the Los Angeles radio station KLOS-FM last week. “He would talk to me. He would sit down and I’d play him our demo. He’d say, ‘Nikki, you’ve got something there.’ One day at the Whisky, he said, ‘Kid, I think you’re going to make it.’ It meant so much to me.”

But Mr. Maglieri worried that some of the musicians and other stars who came through his doors were drinking too heavily or taking too many drugs. He told The Los Angeles Times in 1993 that he had warned Jim Morrison, the lead singer of the Doors, and Joplin to straighten out, without success.

Morrison, he said, “was a good boy” who “would look at me all goofed up and say, ‘Oh, Mario, I love you.’ The reprimanding I gave him didn’t do any good.”

In the book “Straight Whisky” (2004), by Erik Quisling and Austin Williams, Mr. Maglieri is quoted as saying that Morrison exposed himself during a performance at the club. “Big deal, right?” he said. “That son of a bitch. Too bad he’s not alive. I’d give him a spanking.”

After the actor River Phoenix collapsed and died of a drug overdose in 1993 outside the Viper Room, a club on the Sunset Strip, Mr. Maglieri told The Los Angeles Times: “I’m 70 years old and I’ve never smoked a joint in my life. People ask me and I tell them, ‘Dope is for dopes.’ People want to fight me on that, I’ll fight them. I’ve seen too many lives destroyed by drugs.”

Mario Mikeal Maglieri was born on Feb. 7, 1924, in Sepino, Italy, to Alfonso and Christina Maglieri. The family moved to Chicago, where his father opened a nightclub, when Mario was 4 years old.

As a teenager, he drove a beer truck. He later served in the Army and took part in the D-Day invasion of Normandy. Back in Chicago, he got jobs as a court bailiff and nightclub manager before opening his own clubs.

In 1964 he moved to Los Angeles, where he was helping a friend open the Playboy Club when he got a call from Mr. Valentine.

Mr. Maglieri recalled, in “Straight Whisky,” that Mr. Valentine urged him to join him at the Whisky because his employees were helping themselves to the club’s till. “So I say, ‘No problem.’ I go down to the Whisky and fire everyone in the place. That’s how it all started.”

Mr. Maglieri opened the Rainbow in 1972 with Mr. Valentine and the music impresario Lou Adler, who also owned a piece of the Whisky. Mr. Adler and Mr. Valentine subsequently opened the Roxy Theater on Sunset Boulevard, which also became a musical mecca; Mr. Maglieri managed it for 25 years but did not have an ownership interest.

“I don’t think it was innate in him to love rock and rock ’n’ roll people,” Mr. Adler said in a telephone interview on Monday. “But being around it for all the years that he was, he just took a fatherly, grandfatherly, godfatherly feeling toward these people. He loved the kids, the great ones with the problems, like Morrison and Axl Rose.”

In addition to his son, Mr. Maglieri is survived by his wife, the former Scarlett Tribolet; seven grandchildren; and five great-grandchildren.

Mr. Quisling, the author, said in an interview that Mr. Maglieri was especially fond of Led Zeppelin, whose members would call ahead to get their special table at the Rainbow after their concerts at the Forum in Inglewood, Calif. “They were notorious for their hard partying,” he said, “and Mario made sure they were protected from the prying eyes of the paparazzi and made sure things didn’t get too out of hand.”

Of course, he added, when things did get out of hand, Mr. Maglieri took control. The band’s drummer, John Bonham, once punched his chauffeur and some customers, and took a swing at Mr. Maglieri, who decked Bonham with a punch to the jaw.

“He felt bad that it happened,” Mr. Quisling said of Mr. Maglieri. “They were still friends until John died.”
