Hulu announced on Wednesday that Joel Stillerman, AMC’s longtime head of programming, would become the streaming service’s first chief content officer.

The news was months in the making: Hulu has been looking to create and fill the position for some time as it tries to make up ground on rival streaming services like Netflix and Amazon.

Mr. Stillerman, 55, has been the head of programming at AMC since 2008. He was involved with the later seasons of “Mad Men” and “Breaking Bad” and then helped the network make the transition to a new era by bringing hits like “The Walking Dead,” “Better Call Saul” and “Into the Badlands” to life.

While Netflix and Amazon have made, for the last several years, dramas and comedies that have been at the heart of the cultural conversation and have taken home prestigious awards, Hulu has been left behind.

Hulu did, however, get a boon last month with its new drama “The Handmaid’s Tale.” Though streaming services do not release viewership figures — making it difficult to know if a show is broadly popular — the show has received nearly universal praise from critics. As Hollywood kicks into high gear for Emmy Award campaigning, “The Handmaid’s Tale” could give Hulu a long-awaited viable candidate at the awards.


Joel Stillerman, head of programming at AMC, will become Hulu’s first chief content officer this summer. AMC
Craig Erwich, Hulu’s head of content, will remain in his position and will report to Mr. Stillerman.

Hulu is owned by several media companies — Comcast, 21st Century Fox, Time Warner and Disney each have a stake — and several entertainment executives noted that its unusual ownership structure made this new job a bit tricky to sell.

Still, the draws of running programming at a streaming service at this moment are significant. Hulu has been ramping up its original programming slate — Jeff Daniels and Alec Baldwin have signed up for its “Looming Tower” project about Sept. 11 and Stephen King and J.J. Abrams are teaming up for an anthology series — just as it introduced a live TV service a week ago.

Mr. Stillerman will relocate from AMC’s New York offices to Los Angeles for the job. Hulu said he would start in the summer.

“Over the past several years, we’ve grown our audience and our content offering exponentially, and now is the right time to add Joel’s creative and strategic leadership to the team and drive the next phase of Hulu’s content business,” said Mike Hopkins, Hulu’s chief executive.

In a statement, AMC’s president, Charlie Collier, said, “Joel has played a major role in the transformation of AMC from a movie channel into an established leader in original programming.”

AMC said it would begin searching for Mr. Stillerman’s replacement as head of programming at both AMC and Sundance TV.