President Trump, an often profane New Yorker who emerged last year as an unlikely champion for evangelical Christians, was rewarded with some sanctuary by the conservative faithful at Liberty University on Saturday after a brutal week in Washington.

Mr. Trump delivered his first commencement address as president to a Linus-blanket crowd of 50,000 at the university’s football stadium, delivering a pep talk to the graduates — and possibly to himself — after scrambling to contain the political fallout from his sudden firing of the F.B.I. director, James B. Comey, on Tuesday night.

“Never, ever, ever give up,” said Mr. Trump, who, since overcoming long odds to win the presidency, has mused about how unexpectedly difficult the job has been and how he misses his old routines.

“There will be times in your life you’ll want to quit, you’ll want to go home, you’ll want to go home to, perhaps, to that wonderful mother that’s sitting back there watching you and say, ‘Mom, I can’t do it.’ Just never quit.”

Before taking off on Air Force One from the Washington suburbs, Mr. Trump told reporters he would move quickly to appoint a replacement for Mr. Comey, saying that “it’s possible” he could select a permanent leader before leaving for a long overseas trip on Friday.

“We can make a fast decision,” Mr. Trump said. Attorney General Jeff Sessions and his deputy, Rod J. Rosenstein, interviewed a parade of candidates on Saturday at the Justice Department.

Aides described Mr. Trump’s mind-set over the past week as veering from aggrieved to defiant, and one warm-up speaker on Saturday noted that Mr. Trump had publicly referred to how much he sacrificed to leave his luxurious private life for the toils of high-pressure public office.

To buck himself up, Mr. Trump ordered a laminated map showing his electoral support hung in the West Wing. Liberty University, in Lynchburg, Va., is in one of the reddest patches on that map, and the president seemed to relish mixing politics and piety, much as the school’s founder, Jerry Falwell, did, and as his son Jerry Falwell Jr., now its president, continues to do.

Getting elected, Mr. Trump joked, “required major help from God — and we got it.”

Standing in front of a sign that read “Champions for Christ,” a somewhat subdued Mr. Trump offered wide-ranging opinions on college football, on Liberty’s founding and on religion. But his most resonant moment came when he emphasized his emotional connection with an evangelical movement that was initially skeptical of him — skepticism that also took root at Liberty, where students in October protested the younger Mr. Falwell’s support for Mr. Trump.

Mr. Trump signed an executive order this month intended to remove some barriers to partisan political activity by churches. Although the order merely called for policy reviews, some religious leaders were disappointed that it did not offer relief for groups that object to serving or hiring gay men and lesbians.

The president cast himself repeatedly on Saturday as an outsider battling the unfair and corrupt forces in Washington. But this message, a common campaign theme, was delivered in a way that struck audience members as more heartfelt, as he sought to connect his experiences with those of evangelicals in southern Virginia who view themselves as judged and shortchanged by elites like the Washington establishment.

“A small group of failed voices who think they know everything, and understand everyone, want to tell everybody else how to live and what to do and how to think,” Mr. Trump said. “But you aren’t going to let other people tell you what you believe.”

He added: “Embrace that label. Being an outsider is fine.”

Still, questions about the dismissal of Mr. Comey and provocative actions by Mr. Trump since then followed the president on his day trip. Mr. Trump — who confounded supporters and his staff with his ever-shifting account of why he fired Mr. Comey, as well as his suggestion that he may have surreptitiously recorded their conversations — would not say who was on his shortlist to lead the F.B.I.

The president said only that he was reaching out to “outstanding people” at “the highest level” who were “very well known.”

On Saturday, Mr. Sessions and Mr. Rosenstein interviewed eight prospects, according to an official familiar with the process.

Two of those interviewed were Senator John Cornyn of Texas and former Representative Mike Rogers of Michigan. Mr. Rogers, who served as the chairman of the House Intelligence Committee, was an F.B.I. agent earlier in his career. On Saturday, he was endorsed by the F.B.I. Agents Association, which represents more than 13,000 active and retired agents.

Two others are judges with backgrounds as prosecutors in Republican administrations: Michael J. Garcia of the Court of Appeals in New York and Henry E. Hudson of Federal District Court for the Eastern District of Virginia.

Another of those interviewed, Alice Fisher, was head of the criminal division of the Justice Department under President George W. Bush, while another, Frances Townsend, was a homeland security adviser to Mr. Bush.

The remaining two are career F.B.I. officials: Adam S. Lee, the special agent in charge of the bureau’s Richmond, Va., division, and Andrew G. McCabe, the deputy director of the F.B.I., who is currently the bureau’s acting leader.

The list of prospects also includes Representative Trey Gowdy of South Carolina and Raymond W. Kelly, a former New York police commissioner.

The crowd at Liberty was a record, school officials said, and Mr. Trump rewarded his supporters with a flyover above Williams Stadium in Air Force One as people streamed out to their cars.

“We love setting records,” he told the audience. “We love setting records because we have no choice.”