This was a blockbuster week for the White House press briefing, already daytime television’s big new hit.

Now the question is if the show gets renewed.

Its most avid viewer, President Trump, casually floated the notion on Friday that the briefings — a Washington ritual for decades — had finally jumped the shark.

“Just don’t have ’em,” the president said in an interview with Fox News, addressing the sharp criticism he and his press team received after this week’s chaotic rollout of the firing of the F.B.I. director, James B. Comey. “Or else I have one every two weeks and I do them myself.”

It was not quite clear whether Mr. Trump was making a serious proposal or, yet again, poking the eye of his nettlesome press corps. And while the idea may have piqued the interest of some network executives — Mr. Trump, after all, makes for good TV — it quickly drew further criticism.

“That wld be wrong,” Senator Charles E. Grassley of Iowa, a Republican, wrote on Twitter in a pointed response to Mr. Trump’s proposal. “Even We in Senate follow those briefings.”

The White House Correspondents’ Association issued a blunt riposte. “Doing away with briefings would reduce accountability, transparency, and the opportunity for Americans to see that, in the U.S. system, no political figure is above being questioned,” the group’s president, Jeff Mason of Reuters, wrote.

Then there was the hand-wringing from media critics about whether the briefings, which have been carried live on cable news since inauguration weekend, offer much substance to viewers in the first place. The briefing has long been a venue for political reporters to pose tough questions, and for presidential press secretaries to bat those queries away with a mix of obfuscation, spin, semantic acrobatics and the occasional over-the-line falsehood.

With Mr. Trump in charge, and his press secretary, Sean Spicer, at the lectern, the briefings have veered into more epistemological territory. Mr. Spicer has suggested at times that false assertions by the president are true because they are, effectively, true to Mr. Trump.

There have also been many occasions when what was said at the lectern turned out to be flat-out untrue — a problem that drew intense scrutiny this week, when the administration’s account of how Mr. Trump came to fire Mr. Comey was undermined a day later by the president himself.

Speaking with NBC News on Thursday, Mr. Trump made clear that he had planned to fire Mr. Comey regardless of a recommendation from the Justice Department. That forced Mr. Spicer’s understudy, Sarah Huckabee Sanders, to concede that she and her staff were not aware of the full story at the press briefing on Wednesday, when she said the president had dismissed Mr. Comey after reading the recommendation. “I went off of the information that I had,” she said.

The blowback prompted Mr. Trump, in the Fox News interview, to lament that the news media clobbers his press team “if they get it just a little wrong.”

“It becomes a big story for two days or three days,” the president told Jeanine Pirro. “And it’s very very unfair to a person in that job.”

Mr. Trump touted the briefings as “the biggest thing on daytime television,” saying, “Press conferences weren’t even covered for Obama, practically. They were on C-SPAN and C-SPAN2.” (In fact, Obama-era briefings were often carried by major news channels.)

Nevertheless, Mr. Spicer’s job security is one of Washington’s favorite topics these days. And while his fate remains unclear, Mr. Trump described him to Ms. Pirro as “a wonderful human being” and “a nice man.”

“He’s doing a good job,” the president said. “But he gets beat up.”

Credible or not, Friday’s briefing was so highly anticipated — for both the Comey firestorm and the speculation over Mr. Spicer’s future — that all three major broadcast networks cut into regular programming to carry it live.

Mr. Spicer was back at the lectern after a few days’ absence for what he described as previously assigned Navy Reserve duty. Appearance matters to Mr. Trump, and Mr. Spicer took care to look sharp, sporting a neat pocket square and a just-so dimple in his tie.

In terms of substance, though, the press secretary struggled at times, at one point deflecting questions with a repeated, almost plaintive mantra: “The president has nothing further to add on that.” Asked directly if Mr. Trump would cancel the daily briefings, Mr. Spicer said only that the president was “a little dismayed.”

“We come out here and try to do everything we can to provide you and the American people with what he’s doing on their behalf,” Mr. Spicer said, adding: “And yet we see time and time again an attempt to parse every little word and make it more of a game of ‘gotcha.’”

Mr. Spicer never directly said whether the briefings would go on. So regular viewers of this political soap opera were left with but one option: Tune in next week.