Judith Stein, who wrote authoritative books about the black nationalist leader Marcus Garvey and the impact of politics on the American economy while teaching history at City College for 50 years, died on Monday in Manhattan. She was 77.

The cause was complications of lung cancer, her colleague James Oakes, a history professor at the City University of New York Graduate Center, said.

Professor Stein, who retired from teaching last year, influenced the field of political economics with major studies on the collapse of the American steel industry and on the decline in traditional liberalism, which she attributed to a policy agenda that placed Wall Street ahead of factory workers.

“She raised the standard of the field by seamlessly weaving together the political, economic, diplomatic and social histories of late-20th-century United States history,” Professor Oakes said in an email. “Stein wrote history that was politically engaged but always rigorous, neither sentimental nor dogmatic.”

Assertive and irreverent, she was unafraid of challenging her fellow liberals.

“Unlike many on the left,” said Eric Foner, the Pulitzer Prize-winning Columbia University historian, “she offered, before it was common, a critique of liberal Democratic politics as setting the stage for the turn to the right.”

He added, in an email: “She was quite fearless in putting forward ideas that broke with established orthodoxies, pointing out the limitations of neoliberal ideology and pioneering the analysis of the detrimental effects of the policies of both Democratic and Republican administrations on the manufacturing working class and how they contributed to rising inequality.”

Her first book, “The World of Marcus Garvey: Race and Class in Modern Society” (1986), broke ground by placing Garvey — the Jamaican-born founder of the New York-based Universal Negro Improvement Association — and his early-20th-century back-to-Africa movement in the broader perspective of global black politics and economic conditions during and after World War I.

She also identified a fundamental dichotomy in his strategy.

“Garvey attempted to enlist the masses behind the elite model of progress,” Professor Stein wrote.

Clarence E. Walker, a professor at Wesleyan University, wrote in The New York Times Book Review that her authoritative biography of Garvey was “an interesting and intelligent attempt to break away from clichés and acrimony” over his willfulness and attraction to the Ku Klux Klan’s notion of racial purity. Instead, he wrote, Professor Stein delved into Garvey’s success in moving from “agitation to organization.”

In an Op-Ed article in The Times in 1983 Professor Stein recommended that Garvey be pardoned for his conviction in 1923 and subsequent deportation on trumped up mail-fraud charges involving his Black Star shipping line.

“The record exposes political motivation at every stage of the prosecution,” she wrote. “But the law must not be used for suppression of dissent, and the F.B.I. must not serve the political prejudices of its bureaucrats. Pardoning Marcus Garvey, albeit tardily, is a small step toward reaffirming this.”

Professor Stein’s “Running Steel, Running America: Race, Economic Policy, and the Decline of Liberalism” (1998), blamed government policy as much as globalization for the steel industry’s demise.

Her book “Pivotal Decade: How the United States Traded Factories for Finance in the Seventies” (2011) suggested that the government had begun a more conservative economic agenda not with the election of Ronald Reagan, as conventional wisdom has it, but under his predecessor, President Jimmy Carter, a Democrat.

In 2013, Professor Stein was named a distinguished professor at City University and was awarded a fellowship to study the expansion of the American economy in the 1990s. She attributed the economy’s comeback in that decade to a “neoliberal recipe for growth,” whose ingredients included market solutions, fiscal discipline, liberalization of trade and deregulation.

Judith Susan Stein was born on April 17, 1940, in Brooklyn to George Stein, a stockbroker, and the former Anne Shuchman, who taught history and civics at Erasmus Hall High School.

She graduated from James Madison High School and earned a bachelor’s degree from Vassar College in 1960 and a doctorate in history from Yale in 1967, a year after she began teaching at City College.

She is survived by her brother, Jonathan Stein.
