Robert L. Forbes had an answer for the question about selling that rather large and expensive wedding present. “It’s not the sort of thing we hung in the house,” he said, and for the last couple of years, it had been in storage.

On the day of Mr. Forbes’s wedding in 1981, his father, the magazine publisher Malcolm S. Forbes, spent $90,000 on eight glass panels from the Grand Salon of the Normandie, the glittering ocean liner that defined luxury, along with size and speed. The panels went to the Forbeses’ galleries in the headquarters of the family’s financial magazine, which were also home to their collections: a farm’s worth of Fabergé eggs, several brigades’ worth of toy soldiers and an armada of model boats.

But the Forbes galleries closed in 2014, and now the panels are to be sold again, in an auction on June 6 at Sotheby’s. Jodi Pollack, a senior vice president and co-worldwide head of 20th-century design, said she expected the sale price for the panels to be “in the region of $1 million.”

The Normandie, launched in 1935 by Compagnie Generale Translantique, the French name for the French Line, was proclaimed the largest and fastest trans-Atlantic liner, but in a list of the grand vessel’s many superlatives, perhaps the first is stylishness. The maritime historian John Maxtone-Graham affirmed that idea when he wrote that the Normandie was “a superb and chic conveyance; to those who saw her at sea or in port, a mystically awesome silhouette; and to we who can admire her only from afar, she remains unequivocally the ocean liner.”

He was certainly correct that some saw the Normandie at sea or in port, but when he wrote that some admired her from afar, he could have been thinking of time, not distance. The Normandie caught fire and sank in 1942 after only 139 crossings between Europe and the United States and two trips to Rio de Janeiro. The Allies were scrambling to marshal military strength in World War II, and the Normandie was being turned into a troop ship at Pier 88 in Manhattan. But a spark from a worker’s torch ignited a pile of life vests. The ship, already emptied of its glamorous furnishings, tipped over and sank in the night.

Ms. Pollack says no one knows how many panels survived being pried off the walls. “It’s conceivable that many panels did not survive on account of the fragility,” she said. “They were glass. They weren’t recognized as they are today.”

They were the work of the fashionable French illustrator Jean-Théodore Dupas. The eight Forbes panels came from an energetic section at the top of Dupas’s larger design for “The Birth of Aphrodite.” They show the mast of a ship with sails and flags billowing in the sky, along with a winged angel.

“Very often, you see individual panels that are strong on their own but don’t form a pictorial,” Ms. Pollack said. “If you find a background panel that’s very simple, that’s not this.”

Malcolm Forbes bought the panels in the hour or two between a pre-wedding luncheon party in his townhouse in Greenwich Village and the wedding ceremony at a church on the Upper West Side. He raced to Christie’s, which was selling them, and outbid a nightclub entrepreneur. The panels had been expected to sell for $60,000, but there was a bidding war that left Mr. Forbes saying, “I would have liked to have won them for less.”

Robert, the second of five children, said the panels went into the gallery at Forbes magazine’s headquarters on Fifth Avenue. But the gallery closed and the panels were subsequently stored away. “We figured, time to move them to somebody else who I hope will enjoy them,” he said.

Robert Forbes said his father was “an ocean liner aficionado” from boyhood, when the family went to Scotland on the Aquitania. So on his wedding day, Mr. Forbes said, he had an idea that his father might try to buy the panels from the Normandie.

The younger Mr. Forbes wrote in the Sotheby’s auction catalog that another tipoff was the person his father brought to the wedding reception. “He had Rita Reif in tow, who wrote about auction sales and antiques in The New York Times,” he wrote, “and sure enough, he announced that he’d just bought the Normandie panels for me as a wedding present.”

Along the way, Ms. Reif wrote an article about the purchase and the wedding day. And yes, the bridegroom, now a writer of children’s books, and the bride, Lydia Appel Raurell-Soto, are still married.
