Five items max are permitted in the dressing rooms of L Train Vintage, a secondhand clothing store on DeKalb Avenue in Bushwick, Brooklyn. So five items were what Liv Bruce, one-half of the punk-rock duo PWR BTTM, carried in on a recent Thursday afternoon. The haul included shorteralls and polyester dresses, outfits for the stage and the street. (Onstage, Mx. Bruce, who prefers a gender-neutral honorific, leans toward rompers rather than dresses, to avoid an “up-skirt moment” behind the drum set.)

Ben Hopkins, the band’s other member, who also uses gender-neutral pronouns, had a purple sequined cocktail dress draped over one arm (“very Prince and the Revolution”) and didn’t bother.

“I don’t try my dresses on,” Mx. Hopkins said.

What if you can’t get into one?

“Rip it,” Mx. Hopkins said, and shrugged.

Onstage, yelping through PWR BTTM’s campy, blistering songs, Mx. Hopkins’s finery frequently ends up in tatters. “I was just watching some clip where Ben rips a dress off onstage, and I was like, ‘Yes!’” said Christian Joy, the costume designer who has made clothes for Karen O, Childish Gambino and Italian Vogue, and who is currently working with PWR BTTM to supplement its thrifted stage wardrobes with custom designs. “Hopefully they don’t rip off what I make. But how exciting is that for the crowd — like, finally.”

Like Mx. Bruce, Mx. Hopkins performs in dresses and a full face of makeup — Mx. Bruce’s applied more delicately, as if by brush, Mx. Hopkins’s, more expressively, as if by trowel. PRW BTTM is the latest flare in a long, proud tradition of punk rock in a gender-agnostic dress, kicking and screaming since Jayne County (formerly Wayne County) stomped the boards of CBGB decades ago. That Mx. Bruce, 24, and Mx. Hopkins, 25, are proudly, unapologetically queer is central to their act; so is the fact that they rock.

PWR BTTM’s second album, “Pageant,” out Friday, May 12, arrives after a debut record, “Ugly Cherries,” that grew in tiny Brooklyn clubs like Silent Barn and Shea Stadium and broke into the mainstream, elbowing its way onto 2015 best-of lists of national critics. Where “Ugly Cherries” could be lonesome and searching, “Pageant” is fabulously defiant, a barbaric yawp sounded from the borderlands of gender expression and evolving sexuality. (The band name, PWR BTTM — “power bottom” — comes from gay slang, meaning a reins-taking, enthusiastic sexual partner on the receiving end of the experience.)

They have precedents in punk — the queercore thrashing of Limp Wrist, Pansy Division and God Is My Co-Pilot, to name only a few — but PWR BTTM exists where performance art, drag culture and music meet, inheritors of a raucous lineage that includes the Cockettes and Ethyl Eichelberger.

“We’re like if Tom and Jerry were gender nonconforming,” Mx. Hopkins said.

“We’re high-femme Spy vs. Spy,” Mx. Bruce replied.

As advocates for out-and-proud queer visibility, they have been embraced but also criticized for behavior at odds with their message. Some fans were rattled when, in December, a photo surfaced of a young Mx. Hopkins beside a swastika drawn in sand at the beach. (Mx. Hopkins apologized publicly and said it was taken in 2011, “a time in my life where I thought being ‘politically incorrect’ was really funny and had literally no concept of my actions,” adding that it did not represent “who I am today.”)

After the print version of this article went to press, additional questions about Mx. Hopkins’s behavior began to circulate online, spurred by postings on social media accusing Mx. Hopkins of sexual misconduct and boundary-crossing behavior. “These allegations are shocking to us and we take them very seriously,” the band wrote in a statement that was posted to social media on Thursday, adding that they “are trying to address them with openness and accountability.” The band announced it would set up an email address through which allegations could be discussed and was seeking a mediator to monitor it.

Since the allegations, initially posted to a private Facebook group and later on Twitter by a user known as Kitty Cordero-Kolin, several companies and musicians affiliated with the band have ended their relationships. An album-release show at Rough Trade in Brooklyn was canceled, and several artists who were slated to support PWR BTTM on its coming United States tour announced they will no longer participate. The band was also dropped by its management agency, Salty Artist Management.

Polyvinyl, which put out “Pageant,” announced on Saturday it would no longer work with PWR BTTM, or sell or distribute its album, in hard copy and on streaming services. It will offer refunds to those who purchased “Pageant” from the label, and plans to make donations to two organizations that combat sexual and anti-LBGT violence.

The band declined to comment further.

Mx. Bruce and Mx. Hopkins met as students at Bard College in Annandale-on-Hudson, N.Y. Mx. Hopkins was escaping a small-town public school in South Hamilton, in eastern Massachusetts; Mx. Bruce attended a slightly more forgiving private school, Concord Academy, not far away. They arrived at Bard to find a campus far more open to the varieties of identity.

“At a queer meet-up the first week, we were asked to give our name, our pronoun, our gender and our sexuality,” Mx. Bruce recalled before our shopping trip over an eggy brunch pizza at Archie’s in Bushwick, where the drummer worked the phones before PWR BTTM took off enough to be a full-time job. “I remember I said, ‘I identify as reluctantly male.’ Everyone was like, O.K., I get that. No one ever told me I didn’t have to be reluctantly anything, that you can be exuberantly something. I figured that out by senior year.”

Mx. Bruce took what seemed to be a significant breath: “I’m not getting choked up. I have pizza in my throat.”

Mx. Bruce now identifies as transfeminine and non-binary, and is transitioning; both of them identify as queer, and given their druthers, individually prefer the pronouns they/their, which as yet bedevils many news organizations’ style guides. Despite speculation, Mx. Bruce and Mx. Hopkins are not now, and have never been, a couple.

“Ugly Cherries” was recorded during Mx. Bruce’s senior year at Bard, with Mx. Hopkins, who had graduated the year before, holed up and lonely in an apartment in nearby Hudson, N.Y. Though in parts murky and soulful, “Ugly Cherries” can also be exciting in its unbridled directness. On “I Wanna Boi,” Mx. Bruce sings about longing for a partner “to keep the bed warm when the whole house is freezing,” and offered an actual Bard email address in a verse. Responses came in, but “it was all people saying, ‘I want to know if this is real.’”

Now the two have relocated from upstate isolation to Bushwick clangor, and where “Ugly Cherries” was lonely, Mx. Hopkins agreed, “Pageant” is defiant. Mx. Hopkins and Mx. Bruce each get a song on the album reclaiming terms used against them (“Silly” and “Sissy”), and the first single, “Big Beautiful Day,” opens with Mx. Hopkins on the offensive:

There are men in every town who live to bring you down
Make themselves feel bigger making you feel small
My advice is to look incredible
As you make their lives regrettable by being your damn self

Like many of their punk predecessors, PWR BTTM has a fervor onstage that’s hard to fully capture on record, and the band has spent the last year touring widely and at a furious clip (it played 186 shows last year). Along the way, they have accrued a passionate fan base, who tattoo their tweets on their bodies and slavishly recreate their stage makeup. And Mx. Bruce and Mx. Hopkins do find themselves on the receiving end of messages and photos from fans to whom they represent a lifeline, who travel hours to see them perform, in areas far less gay-friendly than Brooklyn. The responsibility of being counselor and confessor is a high-pressure one, and one that the two hesitate to fully embody.

“A band can’t save your life,” Mx. Hopkins said. “A band can be a great soundtrack for that, but people don’t have enough faith in their own power.”

That said, Mx. Bruce added, “The self-help montage in the movie wouldn’t work without the soundtrack.”

And PWR BTTM as a band wouldn’t work if the soundtrack it provided wasn’t legitimately exciting, and fun — if the duo were all gay liberation theology with no chops. They trade off singing duties, both performing their own lyrics, and alternate between drums and guitar (though Mx. Hopkins is the stronger shredder).

“I think the reason they’re successful is because they’ve developed a virtuosity,” said Justin Vivian Bond, the queer performance artist, for whom Mx. Hopkins worked as an assistant one summer when Mx. Bond was curating the Spiegeltent Cabaret at Bard’s Fisher Center for the Performing Arts. “It’s that combination of what’s happening in the world, their aesthetic and their musicianship. And their work ethic. A lot of people dream the dream but don’t know how to work hard enough to make the dream come true.”

But if PWR BTTM’s appeal is not limited to the frontiers of otherness — “I’m a mid-50s straight guy with a house in the suburbs and who typically doesn’t like pop. I’ve been sending links to this video to friends for a week,” a commenter wrote on the YouTube page of one of their clips — it is not surprising that it resounds with special strength among those still looking for queer validation, which is not an untroubled privilege, even in this era of marriage equality.

Mx. Bruce and Mx. Hopkins may not have to fear the ostracism experienced by earlier generations (Mx. Hopkins’s mother, in fact, sings on several of the songs on the new album and occasionally performs with the band on tour), but the presence of prejudice is insidious and durable, and occasionally overt. At a show in Jackson, Miss., in November, PWR BTTM was picketed by anti-gay protesters, who showed up bearing signs about hellfire. The group moved the venue’s entrance to the back, covered the windows with trash bags, roasted the demonstrators on Twitter and played the gig without further incident.

“Queer people are always meant to be the helper, the hairdresser, the fairy godmother, the sassy gay friend,” Mx. Bruce said.

Mx. Hopkins agreed: “What is empowering for me in PWR BTTM is, I am going to take up this space — very effeminate and very insecure, ridiculous in a $2 thrift store dress on with stars glued to my face — and go do that thing I wanted to do. For me, it always makes sense that there’s power in the name — I feel powerful.”
