First come crackly doughnuts with rugged coppery shells, holes nearly caved in and curry leaves peeking through. They taste of salt and earth, the dough made from urad dal, split black lentils with creamy insides, soaked overnight and ground to a flour.

Never mind how long they’ve been sitting in the glass case on the counter: Somehow they still have crunch. Scattered alarms of green chile are matched by red chile flaring in the coconut chutney served alongside, which has the confoundingly lovely effect of cooling and searing at once.

Caffé Lanka — part Sri Lankan restaurant and grocery, part pizzeria, with a sideline in quesadillas, falafel and panini — opened in March by the Castle Hill Avenue subway stop in Parkchester, the Bronx. Sri Lankan food is still a rare sighting in the city outside an immigrant enclave on Staten Island. As of the 2010 census, only some 200 residents of Sri Lankan heritage lived in the whole of the Bronx.

Caffé Lanka’s chef, Rafeek Badurdeen, is one. A native of Kandy in Sri Lanka’s high tea country, he honed his skills in Middle Eastern and Western cuisines at Le Royal Méridien hotel in Abu Dhabi, which partly explains the menu’s intercontinental sweep. But he also wants to serve “the different communities living here,” he said.

On a recent evening, women of South Asian descent sat quietly by the A.T.M., sharing a cheese pizza. I can’t tell you how the pizza tastes, because I wanted hoppers: blooming pancakes of fermented rice flour and coconut milk, spongy at the bottom with the sides reaching upward, growing porous and lacy as they rise. (The shape is achieved by swirling the batter in an appachatty, a sloping pan.)

Order a batch, and the one on top comes with an egg cracked inside, the white sealed into the batter and the yolk unsteady. You could use a knife, but that seems prim; I ate by tearing and dipping into the accompanying sambols, one of onions caramelized to an operatic sweetness, the other a crush of chile and Maldive chips — bonito flayed by smoke and sun until desiccated, a hard concentrate of ocean murk.

String hoppers, steamed convolutions of skinny rice-flour noodles that Mr. Badurdeen makes with a traditional wooden press (“I’m old-fashioned”), bear little resemblance to their hopper cousins. They’re meant to be daubed with the accompanying kiri hodi, a loose coconut-milk curry that forgoes heat for balance, and a potent pol sambol, fresh grated coconut cut with green chile and more of that Maldive fish, and buoyed by lime, both juice and flesh.

Handmade roti is chopped into strips and fed to a pan with an egg midscramble and a collusion of leeks, carrots and meat, roused by green chile, garlic and ginger — kin to fried rice and as delicious. Mr. Badurdeen’s signature version arrives with a molten thatch of Cheddar and mozzarella, a relatively recent innovation in Colombo, Sri Lanka’s cosmopolitan capital, perhaps most beloved in the starkest hours of night.

I never had a chance to try lump rice or deviled beef or half the Sri Lankan dishes listed on the menu. On one visit, only a few were available; on another, none. (I was told that a cook was late.) But whatever I was able to eat, I wanted more: goat biryani from the steam table, the rice boiled with a touch of milk for extra body, or kaliya, eggplant melded with green plantains and nubs of beef liver, with its tinge like buried iron.

The dining area is utilitarian: Seats along the window look across the street at a pawnbroker’s, and a few tables are squeezed up front and along the wall. But dishes are brought to your table, and paper napkins endlessly resupplied, and sometimes Mr. Badurdeen himself will appear bearing a plate of kottu roti with both hands. His young nephews, college students who help out when they can, patiently field questions.

Above, shelves run under the ceiling, stocked with Sri Lankan snacks like Munchee Hawaiian cookies and cheese buttons, Marmite, Nestomalt and jars of melon candy. Serious ingredients are kept in the back: canned mackerel and dried shark; green jackfruit in brine and wood apple jam; dried leaves from the hummingbird tree. They reminded me of all the dishes that might have been, and why I must go back.
