My review of Union Square Cafe last week lifted the restaurant to three stars from the two-star rating that Frank Bruni had given it in 2009. After it was published, I posted a photo of the restaurant’s lettuce salad on Instagram. Apparently it’s famous, this salad. People go wild for it. So when the restaurant moved a few blocks northeast, the occasion for my review, the salad stayed on the menu, more or less unchanged. “Union Square Cafe knows its customers,” I wrote in my Instagram caption.

A commenter replied to this, trying to draw Danny Meyer, the restaurant’s founder and owner, into the conversation: “Hey @dhmeyer can ya please let PW know you serve *guests* not ‘customers.’”

In New York Times style (and in my head forevermore, thanks to the gentle hammering of our copy editors over my five years as a restaurant critic at The Times), a guest is somebody who doesn’t pay: When a friend has you over for a beer, you’re a guest; when you eat in a restaurant and surrender your credit card at the end of the night, you are a customer.

It’s a distinction that restaurants do their best to blur. You even hear it when you’re standing in line at Chipotle or some place like it: “May I help the next guest, please?” But at Union Square Cafe, the choice of words has unique resonance.

After the restaurant opened in its original location on East 16th Street, in 1985, Mr. Meyer worked hard to instill a certain ethos in his employees. It borrowed from Boy Scout law (helpful, friendly, courteous, kind) and served as a polite Midwestern demurral to the notion that New Yorkers went out to eat in order to be intimidated by frighteningly attractive servers whose cheekbones could slice shallots.

The servers at Union Square Cafe weren’t like that. They were boy- and girl-next-door types. They didn’t shovel your driveway or walk your dog. But they’d do just about anything else to win you over. When it worked, you left convinced that you’d gotten something more than you’d paid for.

Mr. Meyer eventually settled on a word to sum up that something more and enshrined it in the name of his company, the Union Square Hospitality Group. From there, the notion of hospitality as the prime directive of restaurant service spread through the land, trickling down to your corner burrito chain.

In the meals I ate before writing my Union Square Cafe review, I experienced that hospitality over and over. In one case, I wasn’t quite the right audience for it. I’d ordered a slice of the espresso chocolate cake, and was asked if I’d like a cold glass of milk to go with it. Well, no, I would not. The thought makes my tongue wrinkle for some reason. But lots of people love the idea, and Union Square Cafe is there to tell them to go right ahead, and drink milk with dessert if that’s what you want.

Another restaurant might try to impress diners by suggesting an esoteric sweet wine whose “flavor profile” supposedly complements the coffee in the dessert but whose real point is to show you how smart the sommelier is. The servers at Union Square Cafe don’t want you to be impressed. They want you to be happy.

Even for a milk-hating curmudgeon like me, this is hard to resist, and I walked out after all three of my meals there in a better mood than when I’d walked in.

Generally, I try to keep my moods separate from my reactions as a critic. If I had a bad day, I don’t take it out on the salmon. But when my mood has been directly affected by something the restaurant did, that’s relevant to the review. In this case it helped Union Square Cafe overcome the forces of gravity and return to the three-star atmosphere, where it had orbited for 20 years until Mr. Bruni’s write-up.

After I’d explained the newspaper’s position on “guests” and “customers,” my Instagram friend wrote: “Did your experience at USC feel like a transaction? Your review didn’t read as such. Perhaps the Times can get with the times and realize word choice can gravely and greatly change the industry.”

No, it didn’t feel like a transaction. But it was one. Believing otherwise would be like believing that David Copperfield had caused the Statue of Liberty to cease to exist. Anybody over the age of 5 knows that the statue was still there. David Copperfield made it invisible, though, just like Union Square Cafe made the machinery of commerce invisible. That’s the trick.
