Maple, the New York City service that has been delivering restaurant-quality food made in its own kitchen, has ceased operations after a little more than two years in business.

In a letter to customers and supporters, the owners, Caleb Merkle and Akshay Navle, said Monday that the company could not succeed financially in its current format; it needed to expand faster, but could not. Maple has been sold to a London company, Deliveroo, which operates in 140 cities in 12 countries, delivering restaurant food.

“It became clear that we needed to close the Maple operation here in New York and look for a partner with scale — one that would allow us to leverage all that we had built across a broader platform,” the letter said. “Given the overlap in our goals and the significant scale of Deliveroo’s operations, working together makes sense. As a result, some members of the Maple team will join Deliveroo operations in London, and our technology will be used to help accelerate growth and efficiency across the platform.”

Unlike Maple, which prepared its own dishes, Deliveroo delivers food made in restaurants. Asked to explain the “overlap” in goals, a spokeswoman for Maple said, “They have a shared vision in reference to delivering great food to your door, and fast.” She said the owners would not comment further.

Maple began with considerable fanfare in 2014, thanks in part to the involvement of the chef and restaurateur David Chang, who was a partner in the company.

Mr. Chang, who last year started his own food delivery service, Ando, which he describes as a “restaurant without walls,” said in an interview on Monday that his role in Maple was only to help the partners get started and assist them in finding a chef.

“I invested a tiny amount of money,” he said. He described Ando as dissimilar to Maple, with a different kind of food and a different set up. “No one has really figured out how to do this,” he said, referring to a preparation and delivery system with restaurant-quality food. “But I believe in it.”
