Desert Trip, a live music festival spanning two weekends last year in Indio, Calif., featured a lineup of classic-rock heavyweights including The Rolling Stones, Paul McCartney, Bob Dylan, The Who and Neil Young.

Some fans called it a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity. Maybe it was: This week, any lingering hopes for a 2017 Desert Trip were officially shut down.

Goldenvoice, the Los Angeles-based concert promoter behind the event (as well as the annual Coachella music and arts festival at the same location) confirmed to Billboard on Thursday that Desert Trip would not be happening this year.

“We loved 2016 Desert Trip,” said Paul Tollett, Goldenvoice’s chief executive. “Maybe someday in the future we’ll do something similar.”

The company did not give further comment on Friday.

The event in the Southern California desert last October was a hit, grossing an enviable $160 million. Rolling Stone called it “a celebration of enduring songwriting and vintage zeal in performance,” and The New York Times said performers “played as if they still have something to prove: not just longevity but a die-hard rock spirit.”

Headline artists at last year’s festival had an average age of 72 — some nicknamed it “Oldchella” — and catered mostly to baby boomers with money to spare. A single-day admission ticket went for $199, and three-day tickets sold for as much as $1,599.

The decision not to put on a Desert Trip this year will leave older music fans with dwindling options for live-music reunions. Large-scale destination festivals are almost always geared toward younger audiences. And it is decidedly bad news for Led Zeppelin fans, some of whom speculated that this year’s Desert Trip could be the place to see the band’s first reunion in a decade.

The rumors were kicked into overdrive this month when fans pointed out that the singer-songwriter Robert Plant’s website changed to a black screen with nothing but the phrase: “Any time now …”

If Mr. Plant, Jimmy Page and other surviving members of Zeppelin do play together anytime soon, Desert Trip won’t be the place, at least not in 2017. Mr. Tollett’s comments left room for speculation the festival could be revived, so it remains to be seen whether classic rock fans will be going to California in 2018.
