“The Marriage of Alice B. Toklas by Gertrude Stein” is a play not by Gertrude Stein but is a play by Edward Einhorn that is a play about marriage pretending to be a play about a play about a marriage.

Or so Stein, as imagined here by Mr. Einhorn, might say, if she were a particularly unhelpful theater critic. In the course of an 80-minute work that centers on the two women’s nuptials, Mr. Einhorn gives Stein, and often Toklas, dialogue that circles and careens before crash landing in unknown territory. “I am Gertrude,” says Gertrude, “pretending to be Alice so when I say Gertrude loves me I mean Gertrude loves Alice.”

Whether Stein really spoke that way — the way she wrote — is not something Mr. Einhorn concerns himself with. Rather, he is interested in borrowing her compulsively reiterative, continuous-present-tense prose style for its intrinsic delight. To that extent, this “Marriage” is a silly aural pleasure, like a child babbling or a suite of Looney Tunes. But to the extent this “Marriage” is not silly at all, but still pleasurable, Stein’s style also serves another purpose: as a marker for the ambiguity that a genius, or any dominant partner, is able to turn into a weapon against intimacy.

The play, which opened Sunday in a production by Untitled Theater Company No. 61, is of course a fantasy. Stein and Toklas never had the opportunity to marry, let alone (as Mr. Einhorn hilariously posits) under a huppah with Carl Van Vechten officiating in a prayer shawl. And though the broad strokes of the couple’s 40-year relationship starting in 1907 are known from such works as Stein’s “The Autobiography of Alice B. Toklas” and “Tender Buttons,” Mr. Einhorn has extrapolated well beyond these riddling sources to explore the psychological pressures inherent in what may or may not have been their real life — but is certainly a lot of people’s.

And so we have Stein (Mia Katigbak, slyly deadpan) jawing in the women’s Rue de Fleurus salon with a Lost Generation “Hollywood Squares” — Picasso, Hemingway, Pound, Eliot, Joyce — while Toklas (Alyssa Simon, radiant) is stuck in another room entertaining their wives and mistresses. (The assorted geniuses and hangers-on are all played, with shaggy panache, by Jan Leslie Harding and Grant Neale.) As Mr. Einhorn paints them for his purposes, Picasso (Ms. Harding) is a cartoon of breezy masculine privilege while Hemingway (Mr. Neale) is an overcompensating closet case. Stein, who holds that male homosexuals are “vile and disgusting,” while lesbians “do nothing disgusting and are happy together,” takes neither man as a model for her brand of marital dominance, though she does call herself Toklas’s “husband.” As such she is fully committed to pleasurable sex: Act One climaxes with one act.

But between such semi-farcical scenes a quieter drama emerges, as Toklas probes the small space Stein does not quite fill to see if there might be room to bloom in it. Her parsing of the odds is exacting. “If there were four Alices,” she says, “Gertrude might not be able to love Alice as much, because there would be as many Alices as Gertrudes. If there were five Alices, that would be too many Alices.” As brilliantly phrased by Ms. Simon, such gnomic utterances take on as much emotional depth as Stein’s manner of speaking denies them, and surprises us in revealing the cost beneath the camp.

It’s doubtful whether the real Toklas, who was no softy, saw her life as a problem that way. Nevertheless, it appears to be the sore spot that Mr. Einhorn, who also directed, wanted to poke. (He has said that he was prompted to write “The Marriage of Alice B. Toklas by Gertrude Stein” in the “wake” of his own 2013 marriage.) Even in a love match beyond social norms of that era, the normative problems of power and dependency insist on arising. Artistic achievement, which would seem to ameliorate those problems, in fact complicates them.

That’s an old tale: We have seen it in works as diverse as “Sunday in the Park With George,” Meg Wolitzer’s novel “The Wife,” and Stein’s own “Storyette H. M.,” a gloss on the unequal marriage of Matisse. (“I am content, you are not content,” goes that piece’s refrain, over and over.) Pretending is fine and may even be a requirement for geniuses, these tales tell us, but it’s a disaster for their spouses. What makes the insight fresh in Mr. Einhorn’s play, despite the occasional amateurishness of its staging, is the absurdist language (and Dada style) in which it’s told. And what makes it painful is the understanding that in every marriage, artistic or not, someone is the genius, someone not.
