LONDON — Salvador Sobral of Portugal broke one of Eurovision’s longest-running losing streaks on Saturday night, scooping up the country’s first-ever win with the uncharacteristically somber ballad, “Amar Pelos Dois.”

“I want to say that we live in a world of disposable music, fast food music without any content,” Mr. Sobral said as he accepted his award on Saturday night in Kiev, Ukraine. “Music is not fireworks, music is feeling, so let’s try to really change this, and bring music back.”

Mr. Sobral, 27, performed the song in Portuguese, dressed in an oversized dinner jacket, and often clasped his hands in front of his chest as he sang. It was a far cry from the other performances, which included shirtless men splashing in a pool; a performer wearing a horse head sitting atop a ladder; another straddling a full-sized cannon; and several instances of fireworks.

He beat out some more-favored acts, including the front-runners Francesco Gabbani, from Italy, whose performance featured a break dancing actor in a gorilla suit; and “Yodel It!” a rap and yodeling mash-up from Romania.

Bulgaria’s entrant, Kristian Kostov, who sang a synthy love song, “Beautiful Mess,” came in second place. Spain’s chipper Manel Navarro performed “Do It For Your Lover” and finished in last place.

The Eurovision Song Contest’s winner is chosen through an intricate process that combines votes from judges from the participating countries with votes sent in by viewers. The announcement process, which was broadcast on television stations around the world on Saturday night, took roughly an hour.

Eurovision, which now draws nearly 200 million viewers each year, begins with a series of contests and official appointments in each of the participating countries to determine who will go to the finals. Most countries compete in a semifinal round, which took place earlier this week. But the countries that pay the highest dues to the European Broadcasting Union, which organizes the event, can move automatically to the finals.

Eurovision winners usually have a shooting star-like trajectory that flares out shortly after their victory, but the contest has also launched some talents with longstanding careers — most notably Abba and Celine Dion. Before it was developed into a stage show that became a worldwide phenomenon, the Irish step-dancing spectacle “Riverdance” began as Ireland’s intermission act when the country hosted the contest in 1994.

This year’s festivities — which took place in Ukraine because that country’s 2016 entrant, Jamala, won last year’s contest — were marked, as many Eurovisions are, with political controversy. Ukraine announced in March that it would ban Russia’s contestant, Yuliya Samoylova, a singer who uses a wheelchair, from entering the country after it was learned she had earlier performed in the Crimean peninsula without gaining Ukraine’s permission to enter. Entering Crimea, which Russia annexed from Ukraine in 2014, without permission from Ukrainian authorities is illegal. (Russia withdrew from the contest, a move that on Saturday may have helped Mr. Kostov, Bulgaria’s entrant who has strong ties to Russia).

On Saturday night, the most unexpected moment took place during a performance by last year’s champion, Jamala. A man wrapped in an Australian flag jumped onto the stage and mooned the camera before being tackled by a security guard. The singer continued her performance, unfazed. The man was identified as Vitalii Sediuk, a Ukrainian who has a history of public stunts; he was later detained by the Ukrainian police.

Mr. Sobral’s sister, Luísa Sobral, who wrote his song (“Amar Pelos Dois” translates from Portuguese as “Love for Two”), joined him onstage after he won for a final performance. Ms. Sobral had also served as her brother’s ambassador in Kiev this week, attending media events and rehearsals for him as he recuperated from recent health problems.

“I think this could be a victory for music, for the people that make music that actually means something,” Mr. Sobral said, as he collected his award.
