The best way to see one of the hundreds of community gardens in New York City is by accident: Nothing quite matches the delight of stumbling unawares onto a peaceful fleck of green tucked away in a maze of stone and concrete. Evening strollers alighting upon the West Side Community Garden on 89th Street on Thursday were met with an added surprise: a Mozart opera, fully staged by On Site Opera, and free to anyone willing to brave the unseasonal chill.

Those who settled on three concentric rows of seats ringing a small lawn were treated to a performance of Mozart’s “La Finta Giardiniera” (in an English translation as “The Secret Gardener”) that was as breezy as the weather. The show was produced with the Atlanta Opera and will travel to that city’s Botanical Garden later this month.

Mozart’s early opera (he wrote it when he was 18) was subjected to some energetic pruning for the occasion, and a good thing, too. This comedy about concealed identities, madness and mismatched couples contains some lovely arias and ensembles, but also reams of workmanlike recitative. Here, it was trimmed to 90 minutes and the score adapted for wind ensemble (and double bass), creating a more compact sound that carried well out of doors. On Thursday, this arrangement was entrusted to the period-instrument ensemble Grand Harmonie, which, led by Geoffrey McDonald, played it with grace and verve.

The story involves three couples with convoluted back stories. The title character is Lady Violet, who poses as a garden girl while putting some distance between herself and her hotheaded lover, Count Belfiore. The On Site Opera version scrubbed out the more disturbing elements of the original, including a stabbing incident that is blithely forgiven, in favor of sharpening the work’s comic thrust.

After a few creaky horticultural puns early on — “I was quite a rake in my time” — Kelley Rourke’s English adaptation found its flow, and the excellent cast of seven young singers seemed liberated by the brief passages of dialogue that took the place of Mozart’s recitatives. Economy of gesture and wit were also the motto of Eric Einhorn’s stage direction, which had singers moving freely about the garden, and which made inventive use of a pair of pruning shears and a hose.

With singers spread out, often behind the listeners, the sound was predictably uneven. In some of Mozart’s finely wrought ensemble numbers it might have been preferable to have them perform closer together. But that was a small price to pay for close-up portraits of some highly talented artists. Outstanding among them were two servants: the baritone Jorell Williams as Robert and the clear-voiced soprano Alisa Jordheim as Serpetta.

The honeyed warmth of Maeve Höglund’s soprano (the noble Arminda) gained impressive bloom in the course of the evening, and the mezzo-soprano Kristin Gornstein, pacing the lawn as Ramiro, whom Arminda rejects, spun lines of an uncannily silky legato that transcended the tricky acoustics of the open space.
