Season 3, Episode 5: ‘It’s a Matt, Matt, Matt, Matt World’

The trials of Job were just a pop quiz in comparison to how much God has tested the Mapleton pastor Matt Jamison through three seasons of “The Leftovers.” In the third episode of Season 1, he won and lost a fortune during a few furious days of gambling and crusading. In the fifth episode of Season 2, he found out his comatose wife, Mary, was pregnant, just before the two of them were locked out of Jarden with the rabble at the town’s gates. There’s a pattern to these Matt episodes. He ventures outside of his everyday bubble and experiences something miraculous ... right before he gets the wind knocked out of him.

This week’s episode varies the formula a bit. Matt does leave home, traveling to Melbourne to retrieve the star of his “Gospel of Kevin” in time for the Sudden Departure’s seventh anniversary. But he’s joined by John, Michael and Laurie, and he spends most of the episode in a confined space instead of desperately journeying to and fro. And while Matt once again faces a ridiculous number of obstacles in a short period, this time he doesn’t witness anything wonderful.

This week’s “Leftovers” begins with a resolution to the semi-cliffhanger from the end of last week’s episode. The explosion that grounded all commercial flights to and from Australia turns out to have been an unauthorized nuclear missile attack, which hit a nearby and unpopulated South Pacific island. Matt gets a waiver from the subsequent no-fly order by loading a small plane with “foreign aid,” but the hangup is that he has to land in Tasmania instead of Melbourne. And there’s another snag: The ferry from Tasmania has been chartered by a private party. Matt and company face having to wait a couple of days to take the 11-hour trip across to the city ... which would be too late bring Kevin back to Jarden before the Sudden Departure deadline.

The gang’s best hope then is to sweet-talk the group that booked the boat: a band of libertine sensualists who plan to spend the whole trip having an orgy. They’re celebrating the life of an elderly lion named Frasier, who sired 35 cubs near the end of his life — one of whom they’ve brought with them. (This is based on a true story, by the way. Sarah Vaughan once sang a song about it.)

So in classic Matt fashion, this man of the cloth — on what he considers to be the most important mission of his life — shares passage with dozens of intoxicated, half-naked, fornicating Aussies. And that’s not the worst of it. The ferry’s also carrying the former Olympic decathlete and sports announcer David Burton, who attentive “Leftovers” viewers will recall was mentioned in news reports last season as having died and been resurrected in Perth. (The hairy mystic in Jarden’s downtown tower even sent the man a letter, via Michael.) Since coming back to life after what he claims was a fatal rock-climbing accident, Burton’s been calling himself “God” and handing out F.A.Q. cards correcting some of the Holy Bible’s mistakes. He’s got his own “Book of Kevin,” in other words — just shorter, and laminated.

One of the consistent pleasures of Matt-centric episodes is watching Christopher Eccleston play a character who from moment to moment ranges from unsympathetically mule-headed to unfairly abused. For the most part, this episode is the weakest of the three Matt episodes we’ve seen, because of the tight location and higher pitch. This hour doesn’t go through as many changes of tone — or plot — as the other two. But the script (credited to Lila Byock and the showrunner Damon Lindelof), Nicole Kassell’s direction and Eccleston’s typically committed, vanity-free performance combine to cut to the heart of what can be so frustrating about this man.

It helps that Eccleston’s Matt gets to play off long-running “Leftovers” characters who know him well and can puncture some of his pretensions. At the start of the episode, Matt is excited by the idea of that he, John and Michael — “three wise men” — will track down their prophet. But then John invites his wife, Laurie, who spends most of the trip needling Pastor Jamison about his disregard for others’ feelings — especially women like her, Mary, and his sister Nora.

Laurie’s not alone in her irritation. Matt expects John and Michael to be on his side, but it becomes clear pretty early in the trip that they’re on this mission more because they’re concerned about him than they are about Kevin. Michael suggests he should give Kevin some space to make up own his mind about coming back. Most important, they think Matt should come to grips with the reason for his frequent nosebleeds: It’s because he’s doesn’t have much longer to live.

As is often the case with “The Leftovers,” most of this episode is about the destructive arrogance of self-appointed seers, who mess with other people’s lives when they claim to be the only ones who can read the signs and portents all around. But it’s also about the people who push back against strict interpretations. When Matt claims that Jarden is a blessed place because it reawakened his wife and gave him a son, John reminds them that his own wife and daughter were driven away while they lived there. When Michael suggests that Matt ask Laurie to help him cope with his looming death — the same way she once cured John of his delusions of grandeur — the pastor bucks against the idea that psychotherapy could trump spirituality.

This episode really finds its rhythm in the last 15 minutes, once Matt is forced to confront the people he’d been hoping to avoid. After he sees Burton throw someone overboard, he tries to get the Frasier sex cult to find out if one of their members is missing. But they’re indifferent, and when he makes the mistake of saying the name “Frasier” aloud, the club rules that he must be held down so that — like the lion — his semen can be harvested.

Matt makes a narrow escape from what was about to be a gang rape, and eventually finds his way to “God” for a climactic scene that is as quietly tense as the orgy-goer sequence is baroque. The man who claims to be the creator of everything makes a mockery of much of what the pastor believes — including the divinity of Jesus, who Burton says rotted in the cave after he was crucified and was replaced by his identical twin brother. Burton also tells him, not at entirely inaccurately, that throughout his life, Matt has been working to glorify himself, not the Lord. Then this God snaps his fingers and flatly says: “Ta-da. You’re saved.”

But saved from what? This episode is more uneven than the other entries in this “Leftovers” subgenre, but it has maybe the strongest ending as a newly mellow Matt arrives in Melbourne, accepting his fatal illness and losing all sense of urgency to find Kevin. He watches Frasier’s descendant escape its cage and chase down David Burton — mauling God. And then Matt delivers one of the funniest, most open-to-interpretation lines in the show’s history, casually telling his friends, “That’s the guy I was telling you about.”

Matt has spent most of his adult life as a man who found meaning in his calling. And as what he believes might be the end of the world approaches, he shrugs and gives up. This is either the roughest or the happiest outcome yet for our Mr. Jamison — depending on how you look at it.

(Don’t) Let the Mystery Be:

• This week’s opening credits song was tough to Shazam, but my iPhone finally recognized it as “The First S’Lihot,” a pre-Rosh Hashanah ceremony recorded by the London Synagogue. From what I could find online about it, this service is an occasion to prepare for Holy Days, but is not a celebration of a Holy Day itself. Make of that what you will.

• The opening sequence this week was spectacular and terrifying, showing a nuclear submarine crewman going mad, stealing a key to a missile switch, and then running naked to a command center, where he stretches out one foot and one hand to initiate a rocket launch. With everything going on in the world right now, this was all difficult to watch. But it’s also funny and on brand for this show to take something as devastating as a rogue nuclear strike and only consider how it inconveniences Matt.

• To get onto the ferry, Matt has to tell the filthiest joke he knows, which I won’t repeat here because it’s wildly inappropriate for a family publication. But in a way, this whole episode is like a joke — not a dirty one, but a shaggy dog story. The last bit of dialogue, “That’s the guy I was telling you about,” is a punch line right up there with, “Orange you glad I didn’t say banana?” or “You’re not in this for the hunting, are you?” or “The Aristocrats!”
